New python manual (#372)
neo4j/driver-documentation: python-manual/modules/ROOT/pages/query-simple.adoc

= Query the database

You can run a query against the database using <<Cypher>> and the methods `Session.execute_read()` and `Session.execute_write()`.

== Write to the database

To create a node representing a person named `Alice`, use the `Session.execute_write()` method in combination with the link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/cypher-manual/current/clauses/merge/[`MERGE`] clause:

.Create a node representing a person named `Alice`
[source, python]
----
def create_person(tx, name):  # <3>
    result = tx.run(
        "MERGE (:Person {name: $name})",  # <1>
        name=name  # <2>
    )
    summary = result.consume()
    return summary

with driver.session(database="neo4j") as session:
    summary = session.execute_write(create_person, name="Alice")  # <4>

    print("Created {nodes_created} nodes in {time} ms.".format(
        nodes_created=summary.counters.nodes_created,
        time=summary.result_available_after
    ))
----

> where *(1)* specifies the Cypher query and *(2)* is a _query parameter_. The query and its parameters are wrapped in a transaction function *(3)*, which is passed as callback to `Session.execute_write()` together with an arbitrary numbers of keyword arguments *(4)*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
where *(1)* specifies the Cypher query and *(2)* is a _query parameter_. 
The query and its parameters are wrapped in a transaction function *(3)*, which is passed as callback to `Session.execute_write()` together with an arbitrary numbers of keyword arguments *(4)*.
```

> [NOTE]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[NOTE]
====
```

> `MERGE` creates a new node matching the requirements unless one already exists, in which case nothing is done. For strict node creation, use the link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/cypher-manual/current/clauses/create/[`CREATE`] clause.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`MERGE` creates a new node matching the requirements unless one already exists, in which case nothing is done. 
For strict node creation, use the link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/cypher-manual/current/clauses/create/[`CREATE`] clause.
====
```

        """, name=name, age=age
    )
    summary = result.consume()
    return summary

with driver.session(database="neo4j") as session:
    summary = session.execute_write(update_person, name="Alice", age=42)
    print(f"Query counters: {summary.counters}.")
----

To create new nodes and relationships linking it to an already existing node, use a combination of `MATCH` and `MERGE` in a `Session.execute_write()` call:

.Create a relationship `KNOWS` between `Alice` and `Bob`
[source, python]
----
def update_person(tx, name, friend):
    result = tx.run("""
        MATCH (p:Person {name: $name})
        MERGE (friend:Person {name: $friend_name})
        MERGE (p)-[:KNOWS]->(friend)
        """, name="Alice", friend_name="Bob"
    )
    summary = result.consume()
    return summary

with driver.session(database="neo4j") as session:
    summary = session.execute_write(update_person,
                                    name="Alice", friend="Bob")
    print(f"Query counters: {summary.counters}.")
----

[WARNING]
====
It might feel tempting to create new relationships with a single `MERGE` clause, such as: +
`MERGE (:Person {name: "Alice"})-[KNOWS]->(:Person {name: "Bob"})`. +

> However, this would result in the creation of an _extra_ `Alice` node, so that you would end up with unintended duplicate records. To avoid this, always `MATCH` the elements that you want to update, and use the resulting reference in the `MERGE` clause (as shown in the previous example). See link:https://neo4j.com/developer/kb/understanding-how-merge-works/[Understanding how MERGE works].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, this would result in the creation of an _extra_ `Alice` node, so that you would end up with unintended duplicate records. 
To avoid this, always `MATCH` the elements that you want to update, and use the resulting reference in the `MERGE` clause (as shown in the previous example). 
See link:https://neo4j.com/developer/kb/understanding-how-merge-works/[Understanding how MERGE works].
```

====

== Delete from the database
To remove a node and any relationship attached to it, use link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/cypher-manual/current/clauses/delete/[`DETACH DELETE`] in a `Session.execute_write()` call:

.Remove the `Alice` node
[source,python]
----
def delete_person(tx, name):
    result = tx.run("""
        MATCH (p:Person {name: $name})
        DETACH DELETE p
        """, name="Alice"
    )
    summary = result.consume()
    return summary

with driver.session(database="neo4j") as session:
    summary = session.execute_write(delete_person, name="Alice")
    print(f"Query counters: {summary.counters}.")
----

[#query-parameters]
== How to pass parameters to queries

> *Do not hardcode or concatenate parameters directly into queries*. Instead, always use placeholders and specify the link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/cypher-manual/current/syntax/parameters/[Cypher parameters] as keyword arguments or in a dictionary, as shown in the previous examples. This is for:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Do not hardcode or concatenate parameters directly into queries*. 
Instead, always use placeholders and specify the link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/cypher-manual/current/syntax/parameters/[Cypher parameters] as keyword arguments or in a dictionary, as shown in the previous examples. 
This is for:
```

1. *performance benefits*: Neo4j compiles and caches queries, but can only do so if the query structure is unchanged;
2. *security reasons*: link:https://neo4j.com/developer/kb/protecting-against-cypher-injection/[protecting against Cypher injection].

> [NOTE]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[NOTE]
====
```

> There can be circumstances where your query structure prevents the usage of parameters in all its parts. For those advanced use cases, see xref:query-advanced#_dynamic_values_in_property_keys_relationship_types_and_labels[Dynamic values in property keys, relationship types, and labels].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There can be circumstances where your query structure prevents the usage of parameters in all its parts. 
For those advanced use cases, see xref:query-advanced#_dynamic_values_in_property_keys_relationship_types_and_labels[Dynamic values in property keys, relationship types, and labels].
====
```

== Anatomy of a query

> Before you can run a query, you need to obtain a session from the driver with the `Driver.session()` method *(1)*. The `database` parameter is optional but recommended for performance, and further xref:transactions#_session_configuration[configuration parameters] can be included.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before you can run a query, you need to obtain a session from the driver with the `Driver.session()` method *(1)*. 
The `database` parameter is optional but recommended for performance, and further xref:transactions#_session_configuration[configuration parameters] can be included.
```

> Within a session, use the methods link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/api/python-driver/current/api.html#neo4j.Session.execute_read[`Session.execute_read()`] and link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/api/python-driver/current/api.html#neo4j.Session.execute_write[`Session.execute_write()`] *(2)*, depending on whether you want to retrieve data from the database or alter it. Both methods take a _transaction function_ callback *(3)* and an arbitrary number of positional and keyword arguments *(4)* which are handed down to the transaction function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Within a session, use the methods link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/api/python-driver/current/api.html#neo4j.Session.execute_read[`Session.execute_read()`] and link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/api/python-driver/current/api.html#neo4j.Session.execute_write[`Session.execute_write()`] *(2)*, depending on whether you want to retrieve data from the database or alter it. 
Both methods take a _transaction function_ callback *(3)* and an arbitrary number of positional and keyword arguments *(4)* which are handed down to the transaction function.
```

> The transaction function *(5)* is responsible for actually carrying out the queries and xref:result.adoc[processing the result]. Queries are specified with the link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/api/python-driver/current/api.html#neo4j.Transaction.run[`Transaction.run()`] method *(6)*, which returns a link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/api/python-driver/current/api.html#neo4j.Result[`Result`] object. You can then process the result *(7)* using xref:result#manipulate-result[any of the `Result` methods], or simply casting it to `list`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The transaction function *(5)* is responsible for actually carrying out the queries and xref:result.adoc[processing the result]. 
Queries are specified with the link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/api/python-driver/current/api.html#neo4j.Transaction.run[`Transaction.run()`] method *(6)*, which returns a link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/api/python-driver/current/api.html#neo4j.Result[`Result`] object. 
You can then process the result *(7)* using xref:result#manipulate-result[any of the `Result` methods], or simply casting it to `list`.
```

.Retrieve people whose name starts with `Al`.
[source,python]
----
def match_person_nodes(tx, name_filter): # <5>
    result = tx.run(""" # <6>
        MATCH (p:Person) WHERE p.name STARTS WITH $filter
        RETURN p.name AS name ORDER BY name
        """, filter=name_filter)
    return list(result)  # return a list of Record objects # <7>

with driver.session(database="neo4j") as session:  # <1>
    people = session.execute_read(  # <2>
        match_person_nodes, # <3>
        "Al", # <4>
    )
    for person in people:
        print(person.data())  # obtain dict representation
----

You can find more information about sessions and transactions in the section xref:transactions.adoc[Run your own transactions].

> [TIP]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[TIP]
====
```

> The driver might automatically retry to run a failed transaction. For this reason, *transaction functions must be _idempotent_* (i.e., they should produce the same effect when run several times), because you do not know how many times they might be executed. In practice, this means that you should not edit nor rely on globals, for example. Note that although transactions functions might be executed multiple times, the queries inside it will always run only once.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The driver might automatically retry to run a failed transaction. 
For this reason, *transaction functions must be _idempotent_* (i.e., they should produce the same effect when run several times), because you do not know how many times they might be executed. 
In practice, this means that you should not edit nor rely on globals, for example. 
Note that although transaction functions might be executed multiple times, the queries inside it are always run only once.
```
